.TH INVOLUCRO 1 "2016-01-21" "1.0"
.SH NAME
involucro \- build and deliver software with containers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B involucro
[\fB-H\fR \fIURL\fR | \fB-host\fR \fIURL\fR]
[\fB-f\fR] \fIFILE\fR | \fB-e\fR \fISCRIPT\fR]
[\fB-v\fR \fIVERBOSITY\fR]
[\fB-set\fR \fIKEY\fR=\fIVALUE\fR | \fB-s\fR \fIKEY\fR=\fIVALUE\fR]...
[\fB-w\fR \fIWORKDIR\fR]
(\fB-T\fR | \fB-tasks\fR | \fITASK\fR...)
.LP
.B involucro -version
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-host " " \fIURL\fR
The socket to connect to when contacting Docker. May be a UNIX socket
of the form \fIunix:///var/run/docker.sock\fR or a TCP socket of the form
\fItcp://localhost:2375\fR.
.TP
.BR \-f " " \fIFILE\fR
Set the file to execute instead of the default \fIinvfile.lua\fR (or
\fIinvfile.lua.md\fR in literate mode). See FILE for more information.
.TP
.BR \-e " " \fISCRIPT\fR
Execute the script directly. The script is expected to be a non-literate file,
but otherwise conforming to the same constraints imposed on files.
.TP
.BR \-v " " \fIVERBOSITY\fR
Sets the verbosity to the given level.
.RS
.TP
.BR -1
Only error messages are shown
.TP
.BR 0
Warnings and error messages.
.TP
.BR 1
Warnings, errors and a \fISTEP\fR message for each step.
.TP
.BR 2
All of the above plus standard output and standard error of each executed command.
.TP
.BR 3
All of the above plus status messages during each step.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-set " " \fIKEY\fR=\fIVALUE\fR
Makes \fIVALUE\fR available in the script file under the name \fIVAR.KEY\fR,
for example: \fB--set\fR \fIMESSAGE\fR=\fIHello\fR and script \fIprint(VAR.MESSAGE)\fR will
print \fBHello\fR. May be used multiple times to set multiple values.
.TP
.BR \-w " " \fIWORKDIR\fR
Set the directory that is the base for all operations. By default, this
directory will be made available to Docker containers as \fI/source\fR. This is
important to set if the current directory is not on the same filesystem
instance as the Docker instance, for example when working on Windows etc.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-tasks
Instead of executing any task print the defined tasks instead. Each task will
occupy one line.
.TP
\fITASK\fR
Matches one of the tasks defined in the control file. If given multiple times
the tasks will be executed in order.
.SH CONTROL FILE
Involucro is configured by a Lua script file. By default, it is looking for
\fIinvfile.lua\fR in the current directory, but this can be overridden with
\fB-f\fR.
.LP
A configuration file contains a set of tasks identified by a unique name.
These names can be specified when invoking \fBinvolucro\fR and are executed in
the order they are given.  For example, \fI$\fR \fBinvolucro build package\fR
will run the \fIbuild\fR and afterwards the \fIpackage\fR task.  A task can be
created by invoking \fIinv.task(\fB'ID'\fI)\fR in the configuration file.
.LP
For easy readability, the configuration file uses a fluent syntax to build the
tasks. The available methods are either modifying the next registered step, or
are registering a step. This type distinction is documented below for each
method.
.LP
\fIinv.task(\fB'ID'\fI)\fR (\fImodifier\fR) sets the task of the next
registered step to \fB'ID'\fR. It makes the methods \fBusing\fR, \fBrunTask\fR,
and \fBwrap\fR available.
.LP
Each task consists of a list of steps that are run in the order they are given
in the file. There are different types of steps. Each step has one
\fIintroductory\fR method made available from the task, a set of
\fImodifying\fR methods setting different properties of the step, and a final
\fIregistration\fR method that registers these settings for execution. The
current status can be stored at any point into a variable and reused later.
However, the steps are strictly run in the order their registration method was
called.
.SS Run Step
A run step executes a Docker container. By default, the current working
directory is mounted as \fI/source\fR into the container which is also
configured to be the working directory of the process running in the container.
It is mainly used to transform source code using external processes such as
compilers into a different form.
.LP
\fItask.using(\fB'IMAGE_ID'\fI)\fR (\fIintroductory\fR) starts off a run step by
specifying the repository name (optionally with tag) or the image ID of the
image to be run. Example: \fItask.using('gcc:4.9')\fR.
.LP
\fIrunstep.withConfig(\fBTABLE\fI)\fR (\fImodifying\fR) sets the values in
the Lua table as configuration values for the Docker container. The values that
can be set here are only affecting the container itself, not how is connected
with the host. See \fIwithHostConfig\fR for this. The available options are
documented at \fIConfig\fR (see \fBSEE ALSO\fR).  The keys are interpreted case
insensitive. Example: \fIrunstep.withConfig({Cmd = {"/bin/echo", "Hello,
World!"}})\fR.
.LP
\fIrunstep.withHostConfig(\fBTABLE\fI)\fR (\fImodifying\fR) sets the values
in the Lua table as host configuration values. These values control the exact
execution semantics of the container from the hosts point of view. The
available options are documented here at \fIHostConfig\fR (see \fBSEE ALSO\fR).
Example: \fIrunStep.withConfig({links = {"redis"}})\fR.
.LP
\fBNOTE\fR: By default, \fBinvolucro\fR binds the current directory as
\fI/source\fR. If the \fIBinds\fR key is set in the given table it overwrites
this binding. \fBInvolucro\fR interprets the given bindings and changes all
relative source bindings to absolute paths. This enables bindings such as
\fI{binds = {"./dist:/data", "/tmp:/tmp"}}\fR.
.LP
\fIrunstep.withExpectation(\fB<TABLE>\fI)\fR (\fImodifying\fR) registers expectations
towards the output and exit code of the process. By default, \fBinvolucro\fR
expects the process to exit cleanly with exit code \fB0\fR. Tests of executables
however may require expecting a process to fail. This can be set with the expectation
\fIcode = runstep.withExpectation({code = 1})\fR.  Similarly, an expectation
towards the output of the process on stdout and/or stderr can be registered
with regular expressions conforming to Re2 syntax (see \fBSEE ALSO\fR).
Example: \fIrunstep.withExpectation({stdout = "Hello, World!\\n"})\fR.
.LP
\fIrunstep.run(\fR'<CMD>'...\fI)\fR (\fIregistration\fR) registers the run
step. The arguments are used as the command-line arguments of the process being
run. It directly follows Docker semantics regarding process execution. Each
argument is used as a single argument for the process. Example:
\fIrunstep.run('/bin/echo', 'Hello, World!')\fR.  Note that there is no
wildcard expansion or variable replacement if the arguments are not given to a
shell such as \fI/bin/sh\fR.  Example: \fIrunstep.run('/bin/sh', '-c', 'echo *')\fR.
.SS Wrap Step
A wrap step takes the contents of a directory and creates an image layer out of
it, optionally with a parent image layer and meta data. The resulting image can
be tagged into a repository with a tag name (or `latest`, if none is set).
.LP
\fItask.wrap(\fB'<SOURCE_DIR>'\fI)\fR (\fIintroductory\fR) starts off a wrap step by
specifying the directory containing the files that are to be wrapped into an
image. It is also possible to use the current directory (.).  Example:
\fItask.wrap('dist')\fR.
.LP
\fIwrapstep.at(\fB`('<TARGET_DIR>'\fI)\fR (\fImodifying\fR) sets the directory in the resulting
image into which the files are copied.  This can be used to put HTML files into
the location the web server in the parent image expects them to be. This
directory doesn't need to exist yet. Example: \fIwrapstep.at('/data')\fR.
.LP
\fIwrapstep.inImage(\fB`('<PARENT_IMAGE>'\fI)\fR (\fImodifying\fR) causes the resulting image
to be a child of the image identified by the parameter. If this modification is
omitted the resulting image is parent-less. Example:
\fIwrapstep.inImage('nginx')\fR.
.LP
\fIwrapstep.withConfig(\fB<TABLE>\fI)\fR (\fImodifying\fR) sets configuration values similar
to the \fIwithConfig\fR method of the run step above. This can be used to pre-set
an entrypoint or exposed ports. Example: \fIwrapstep.withConfig({exposedports =
{"80/tcp"}})\fR.
.LP
\fIwrapstep.as(\fB'<IMAGE_NAME>'\fI)\fR (\fIregistration\fR) registers the step for
execution. The image constructed by the previous modifications is built and
tagged with the given name, which may include a registry designation. Example:
\fIwrapstep.as('app:latest')\fR.
.LP
.SS Runtask Step
As a convenience, it is possible to run another task as part of a task. This
emulates the conventional \fRall\fI task from Makefiles. Exceptionally, the
introductory method for this step is also the registration method.
.LP
\fItask.runTask(\fB'<ID>'\fI)\fR (\fIintroductory registration\fR) registers a
step that executes the task with the given ID as part of the steps in this
task. Example: \fIinv.task('all').runTask('compile').runTask('package')\fR.
.LP
.SS Tag Step
.LP
Sometimes, there should be two versions of the same image sharing the same
image ID, for example to have the \fIlatest\fR tag equivalent to version
\fIv2\fR. The tag step helps in this case.
.LP
\fItask.tag(\fB'<NAME>'\fI)\fR (\fIintroductory\fR) starts a tagging by setting
the name of the original image. This can be anything Docker accepts, including
\fItest/asd:v2\fR, but also actual image IDs. Example:
\fItask.tag('test/asd')\fR.
.LP
\fItagstep.as(\fB'<NAME>'\fI)\fR (\fIregistration\fR) registers a step that
tags the image named in introductory method to the name given as parameter.
Example: \fItagstep.as('test/asd')\fR.
.LP
.SS Hook Step
.LP
Control files can change their behaviour during tasks with hooks, for example
to use the results of previous tasks with \fIio.lines\fR.
.LP
\fItask.hook(\fB'<FUNCTION>'\fI)\fR (\fIintroductory registration\fR) registers
a step that, when taken, runs the given function. No arguments are passed, and
any return values are ignored. Example: \fItask.hook(function () print('in
step') end)\fR.
.LP
.SS Push Step
.LP
Tagged images can be pushed to repositories where they can be pulled by other
users. This step may involve authentication, see below for details.
.LP
\fItask.push(\fB'<NAME>'\fI)\fR (\fIintroductory registration\fR) registers a
step that, when taken, pushes the image with the given name to a remote
repository.  Note that the default Docker rules apply with regard to names: If
a name starts with a server address the image is pushed there, and if not
Docker Hub is selected.  Example: \fItask.push('image:latest')\fR.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
Pushes and pulls to a remote registry or to Docker Hub may be neccessary to be
authenticated.  Involucro solves this by reading a JSON file in the home
directory of the current user called \fI.involucro\fR.  This file (currently) only
contains information about authentication, but more uses may be introduced
later.
.LP
To configure username, password, and email place a file of the following form
into \fI$HOME/.involucro\fR:
.nf
.RS
{
  "auths": [
    "https://USERNAME:PASSWORD@SERVER.COM/?email=EMAIL@EXAMPLE.COM"
  ]
}
.RE
.fi
Multiple entries are possible, but only one per server.  By definition, the
address for Docker Hub is \fIindex.docker.io/v1/\fR, so the configuration for a
user \fBalice\fR with password \fBb0b\fR and email address \fBalice@devs.io\fR
on Docker Hub is:
.nf
.RS
{
  "auths": [
    "https://alice:b0b@index.docker.io/v1/?email=alice@devs.io"
  ]
}
.RE
.fi
\fBNOTE:\fR Please keep this file hidden from any user except you as it contains the
password in plaintext!
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
.RS
inv.task('all')
  .runTask('compile')
  .runTask('package')
  .runTask('test')
  .runTask('publish')

inv.task('compile')
	.using('gcc')
    .run('gcc', '-o', 'dist/add', 'add.c', '-static')

inv.task('package')
	.wrap('dist').inImage('busybox').at('/usr/local/bin')
  .withConfig({entrypoint = {"/usr/local/bin/add"}})
  .as('test/showaddition:latest')

inv.task('test')
  .using('test/showaddition:latest')
  .withExpectation({code = 0, stdout = "5 \\+ 10 = 15"})
	.run()

inv.task('publish')
  .hook(function ()
    local t = os.time()
    inv.task('publish:tag')
      .tag('test/showaddition:latest')
        .as('test/showaddition:' .. t)
    inv.task('publish:push ')
      .push('test/showaddition:' .. t)
  end)
  .runTask('publish:tag')
  .runTask('publish:push')
.RE
.fi
.PP
.SH TRADEMARKS
Docker® is a registered trademark of Docker, Inc.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR docker (1)
.LP
.B HostConfig:
.I https://godoc.org/github.com/fsouza/go-dockerclient#HostConfig
.LP
.B Config:
.I https://godoc.org/github.com/fsouza/go-dockerclient#Config
.LP
.B Re2 syntax
.I https://github.com/google/re2/wiki/Syntax
